---
title: Reindeer All The Way Down
date: 2023-12-19
authors: [ingydotnet]
categories: [Advent-2023]
talk: 0
---

Santa is in charge of Christmas.
He's the one who makes sure that all the children get presents.
But who is in charge of getting Santa his presents?
That's where the reindeer come in.
They are the ones who make sure that Santa gets his presents.
But who is in charge of getting the reindeer their presents?
More reindeer!
But who is in charge of getting the reindeer's reindeer their presents?
More reindeer!
It's reindeer all the way down.

<!-- more -->


### Welcome to Day 19 of the YS Advent Calendar

YS is a new programming language that is based on Clojure.
It's written in Clojure and compiles to Clojure.
In effect YS is Clojure.
So if YS is written in Clojure, why not just use YS to write YS?

Isn't there a chicken and egg problem here?
Sure, but that's easy to solve.

Once you have a stable version of YS, you can rewrite YS in YS.
You just need to use a previously compiled version of YS to compile the new
YS-in-YS with.

This is called self-hosting and it's a common practice in the programming
language world.
Clojure itself is written in Clojure.
Not all of it.
It's also written in Java, since it runs on the JVM.
But all the core libraries are written in Clojure.

YS isn't quite ready to be self-hosted yet.
But I was able to convert the `ys::std` library to YS and then build YS with
it!

Have a look at this [gist](
https://gist.github.com/ingydotnet/480d7243a797c9323b973cf5c5dea933).

It has 3 files:

* [orig-std.clj](
https://gist.github.com/ingydotnet/480d7243a797c9323b973cf5c5dea933#file-orig-std-clj)
  — The original Clojure version of `ys::std` as of today.
* [std.clj](
https://gist.github.com/ingydotnet/480d7243a797c9323b973cf5c5dea933#file-std-clj)
  — The compiled version of YS port of `ys::std`.
* [std.ys](
https://gist.github.com/ingydotnet/480d7243a797c9323b973cf5c5dea933#file-std-ys)
  — The YS port of `ys::std`.

I don't know about you but I find the YS version much easier to read than the
Clojure version.

However since there's still a lot of work left to do on YS, before the first
stable release, some of the YS code is a bit ugly.

Let's look at a few ugly forms and think about how to make them better.

Let's start with the `ns` declaration at the top of the file:

```yaml
ns ys::std:
  (:require
   [yamlscript::debug]
   [clojure::pprint]
   [clojure::string])
  (:refer-clojure :exclude [print])
```

Soon we'll have a YS macro system for making certain calls look better than
they do with the base syntax.
The future `ns` declaration might look like this:

```yaml
ns ys::std:
  require:
    yamlscript::debug:
    clojure::pprint: pp
    clojure::string:
  refer-clojure:
    exclude: print
```

That looks pretty nice!

How about this ugly multi-arity defn:

```yaml
defn toMap:
  +[]: +{}
  +[x]:
    apply: hash-map x
  +[k v & xs]:
    apply: hash-map k v xs
```

Here we needed to plus-escape the `[]` keys.
I'd rather see like:

```yaml
defn toMap:
  (): hash-map()
  (x):
    apply: hash-map x
  (k v *xs):
    apply: hash-map k v xs
```

Parentheses are just normal characters in YAML so we don't need to escape them.
And we already use parens in `defn foo(bar): baz` so it's consistent.

One of the more problematic forms in this file is the macro definition:

```yaml
defmacro each [bindings & body]:
  +`(do
      (doall
        (for [~@bindings] (do ~@body)))
      nil)
```

I pretty much had to leave the original Clojure syntax alone here.
The backtick is a reserved character in YAML so we had to plus-escape it.

There's actually quite a few problems that macros cause for YS.
I won't bore you with the details.
We'll figure out a good way to code macros in YS but I can't say that I have it
figured out yet.

At this point I'd say that about 80% of Clojure code ports nicely to YS.
The other 20% is a bit of a struggle.
But that's stuff I want to improve before the first stable release.

----

I hope you enjoyed today's post.
It was a little shorter than usual.
But YS is keeping me very busy and I was a little short on time today.

I have something really special planned for tomorrow.
But I need to make it work first!
Fingers crossed.

Come back tomorrow for Day 20 of the YS Advent Calendar.
