---
title: YAMLScript Firsts
date: '2024-03-14'
tags: [blog]
permalink: '{{ page.filePathStem }}/'
author:
  name: Ingy döt Net
  url: /about/#ingydotnet
---

### Remember Your First Time?

Do you remember the first time you wrote a program in a new language?
For YAMLScript, mine was yesterday!

This is my first post of 2024.
I've been working on YAMLScript non-stop since the last [YAMLScript Advent
2023](advent-2023/index.md) post.
Too busy to write a blog post, I guess.

Yesterday something awesome happened.

Putting out a YAMLScript release is a complicated process.
It takes me about an hour to do it.
Of course I plan to automate it fully but I just haven't had the tuits.

For the last several releases, I've had a text file that listed all the steps so
that I wouldn't forget anything.
Yesterday I automated that list...

...you guessed it...

...in YAMLScript!


### The 10 Step Program

Of course I have been writing test programs in YAMLScript for a while now.
This was the first time that I wrote a YAMLScript program that actually does
something I need to do on a regular basis.

Without further ado, here is the [YAMLScript Release Automation Program](
https://github.com/yaml/yamlscript/blob/29996dd705/util/release-yamlscript).

It's a 10 step program that does everything I used to do manually.
I think it turned out pretty nice.

Judge for yourself but let me tell you a bit about it first.

* There are 10 steps to perform.
* If a step fails you can run it again.
* You can indicate which steps to start and end at.
* Reports information about each step as it goes.
* Has a verbose mode that shows you what it has done to various files.
* Has a dry-run mode that shows you what it would do without doing anything.
* Validates its inputs and tries to doublecheck its work.
* Everything is broken up into short and simple functions.
* Execution starts with the main function at the top.
* Shells out to common CLI commands to get things done.
* Uses multiline literal scalars with interpolation to make changelog entries.
* Fairly well documented internally with comments.

It's pretty much like a shell script, but written in YAMLScript.
Given that YAMLScript is a functional language with immutable data, perhaps it's
more reliable than a shell script.
Time will tell.

I also added a Makefile rule to run the program.
It supports several variables to control the program and writes the output to
stdout and a log file.

Here's the output from a dry-run:

```bash
$ make release-yamlscript o=0.1.42 n=0.1.43 v=1 d=1
./util/release-yamlscript 0.1.42 0.1.43  2>&1 | tee -a release-0.1.43.log

Releasing YAMLScript v0.1.43 at Thu Mar 14 07:28:19 AM PDT 2024


Step 1) Update '.version.sh' file
+ git -P diff .version.sh

Step 2) Run 'make bump'
+ make bump
+ git -P diff

Step 3) Update the 'Changes' file
+ grep -F -B999 '0.1.42' Changes

Step 4) Update the Change Log files for the binding modules

Step 5) Commit the release changes to git
+ git commit -a -m 'release: 0.1.43'

Step 6) Add git tag for the new version
+ git tag 0.1.43

Step 7) Push the git commit and tag
+ git push
+ git push --tags

Step 8) Run 'make release'
+ make release

Step 9) Run 'make release' for each language binding library
+ make -C clojure release
+ make -C go release
+ make -C java release
+ make -C julia release
+ make -C nodejs release
+ make -C perl release
+ make -C perl-alien release
+ make -C python release
+ make -C raku release
+ make -C ruby release
+ make -C rust release
+ git -P diff

Step 10) Publish the yamlscript.org website
+ make -C www realclean publish
```

Maybe it's time for you to write your first YAMLScript program!

If you do, drop me a line and tell me how it went.
YS is still a young language and I'm always looking for feedback.


### Other Firsts

Last Monday someone published the [first article about YAMLScript](
https://thenewstack.io/with-yamlscript-yaml-becomes-a-proper-programming-language/).

It was based on YAML core team member [Tina Müller](
https://github.com/perlpunk)'s [recent talk about YAML](
https://fosdem.org/2024/schedule/event/fosdem-2024-2046-do-you-know-yaml-/
) at the [FOSDEM 2024](https://fosdem.org/2024/) which had a section about
YAMLScript.

The article was accurate and well researched which is a rare thing for YAML in
my experience.

Also last week I gave the first 2024 public talk about YAMLScript at the
[Seajure Meetup](https://www.meetup.com/seajure/events/299251467/) in Seattle.
Seajure is a Seattle based Clojure meetup that I started attending last year.
The talk was well received and I got some good feedback.
The video should be available soon.

Next month YAMLScript will be presented at its [first conference talk of 2024](
https://ossna2024.sched.com/event/1aBPY) at
the [Linux Foundation's Open Source Summit North America](
https://events.linuxfoundation.org/open-source-summit-north-america/).
I hope to see you there!

### Future Firsts

There's a few big things in the works for YAMLScript this year worth mentioning:

* A YAML Schema DSL that will be used to validate YAMLScript evaluation results.
* Compiler source maps for IDE integration and better error messages.
* YAMLScript User Documentation (finally).

I'll be back here next week to tell you about all the things that have happened
with YAMLScript in the last 3 months.
So much good stuff.
Stay tuned!

YS We Can! — Ingy döt Net
