---
title: The Kubernetes Effect
date: 2024-11-29
authors: [ingydotnet]
categories: [General]
talk: 0
---

In my many years of creating Open Source software and talking about it at
conferences, some of the most productive development times are often those
leading up to the presentation.

In the last post, I mentioned that I was going to present a
[90 minute YS tutorial](https://yamlscript.org/kubeys24) at
[KubeCon (November 15th in Salt Lake City)](
https://events.linuxfoundation.org/kubecon-cloudnativecon-north-america/).

The conference was amazing and the YS tutorial was a huge success.
I came away with the feeling that YAML and YS had found their community.
**KubeCon felt like YAMLCon**!

<!-- more -->

But today's post is about the work leading up to the conference and the new data
oriented features that were added to YS as a result.

At the start of October we realized there were a few things we wanted to add to
the language to make it great for defining dynamic data in YAML files.

YS is a complete programming language and while you could already do almost
anything with it, we knew that it had blend smoothly into the existing YAML
files that people use for Kubernetes and other uses.
We started by focusing on Helm charts, and seeing how well YS could fit along
side the Go templating system (or replace it entirely).
In the end it all worked out very well, but a few things needed to be added
before tutorial time.

!!! note

    **TL;DR for Helm Users:** <https://yamlscript.org/doc/helmys>

In this post I want to cover some of the new (and old) features of YS that you
can use to do cool things in your YAML files that are not possible with YAML
alone.
And remember, your YAML files are already valid YS files; but if you load them
(or preprocess them) with YS, you can do a lot more in there.


## What YAML Can Do Now

YAML 1.2 has a few things that let you do things a bit fancier than with a data
only format like JSON:

* YAML has anchors and aliases for reusing specific nodes by naming them, and
  then later referring to them by name.
* YAML has a special `<<` "merge key" that you can use to merge mappings.
  This was actually removed from the 1.2 spec but many popular implementations
  still support it (albeit with inconsistent behavior between implementations).
* YAML allows you to tag nodes and this can sometimes be used creatively, though
  not consistently across different YAML implementations.
* YAML supports multiple "documents" in a single file or stream, although
  unfortunately the spec doesn't allow you to alias nodes across documents.

YS supports all of these features too.
It needs to since it claims to support the current YAML files of the world.
But YS being a complete programming language lets you go so much
further!

Let's take a closer look…


## External (and Internal) Data Sources

Even though YAML lets you reuse nodes by name, those nodes need to be part of
your YAML document.
Say you have a section at the top of your YAML file that defines some default
values and names them with anchors, to be aliased later throughout the file.

This is problematic because the node of defaults is also going to be a part of
your data when you load it.
It would be nice if you could have 2 documents in a YAML file where you define
the data sources to be referred to in the first document, and then refer to them
in the second document.
If the loader returned the final (second) document then you could get the data
you wanted without also getting the data that you don't.

Let's try it out:

```yaml
# file.yaml
---
- &map1
  name: Bobbi Datamon
- &list1
  - fun
  - games
- more: stuff

--- !YS-v0:
person:
  <<: *map1
  likes: *list1
```

Now we can load it with the YS command line interpreter, `ys`:

```
$ ys --load file.yaml
{"person":{"name":"Bobbi Datamon","likes":["fun","games"]}}
```

Looks like it worked, but `ys --load` prints the result in compact JSON.
Before we discuss what happened, let's show the result in YAML:

```
$ ys --load --yaml file.yaml
person:
  name: Bobbi Datamon
  likes:
  - fun
  - games
```

Nice!
`ys --load` gave us the data from the final document that included data from the
first document.

</p><details style="background-color:#eee"><summary><strong><em>
More about loading YS</em></strong></summary>

You can just use `ys --yaml` (or even `ys -Y`) instead of `ys --load --yaml`.
Use `-J` (for `--json`) to format `--load` output as a prettier JSON.

The YS "load" operation defaults to JSON because it is designed to output data
in an interoperable form.
JSON is very interoperable and the JSON data model is a subset of the YAML data
model.

Instead of using `ys` to load YAML/YS files, you can use a YS library to
replace other YAML loaders in
[10 (and counting) common programming languages](/doc/bindings.md), including
Python, Go, Ruby, Rust, Java and JavaScript.

For example, in Python you could do this:

```python
from yamlscript import YAMLScript
ys = YAMLScript()
text = open("db-config.yaml").read()
data = ys.load(text)
```

and similar in any other language that has a YS binding library.

</details><p></p>

The careful reader will have noticed that we broke the rules of YAML.
We aliased  nodes that were anchored in a different document.
What's up?

Well, the two YS documents each have a different [YS mode](/doc/modes.md)
and that makes things work differently.

The first document has no `!YS-v0` tag and thus is in "bare mode".
In bare mode all the rules are the same as YAML 1.2 (using the Core schema).

The second document has the `!YS-v0:` tag.
The `!YS-v0` tag tells YS that the document is in "code mode"
(the content starts as code but can switch to data mode at any time).
The `:` in `!YS-v0:` tells YS to switch to data mode right away.

In code mode and data mode, aliases are very different than in bare mode.
They can access anchored nodes in the same document or any previous document.
Not only that, you can access parts of the anchored node with a path syntax.
For instance `*map1.name` would produce the string "Bobbi Datamon" and
`*list1.1` would produce the string "games".

That means that this works the same way as the previous example:

```yaml
--- &data
map1:
  name: Bobbi Datamon
list1:
- fun
- games
more: stuff

--- !YS-v0:
person:
  <<:: -*data.map1
  likes:: -*data.list1
```

Here we only anchored the entire first document and then used the path syntax to
access the parts we wanted.
Note that to do this we used `::` to switch to code mode and we also needed to
used `-` to escape the values and have them be treated as YS expressions.

YS has special `+++` symbol that evaluates to an array of all the prior
documents in the stream.
That means we don't need anchors at all:

```yaml
map1:
  name: Bobbi Datamon
list1:
- fun
- games
more: stuff

--- !YS-v0:
person:
  <<:: +++.last().map1
  likes:: +++.$.list1
```

The `+++.last()` function returns the last document in the stream so far (the
first document in this case)
The `+++.$` is a shorthand for `+++.last()`.

Another approach to take here is to make the first document use YS in code mode
and define variables to use in the second document:

```yaml
--- !YS-v0
map1 =::
  name: Bobbi Datamon
list1 =::
- fun
- games

--- !YS-v0:
person:
  <<:: map1
  likes:: list1
```

We use `=:` for assignment expressions in YS.
And `=::` does the same thing but toggles the mode of the value.

What if `list1` was a huge list and you really wanted to keep it in a separate
file?

No problem:

```yaml
# big-list.yaml
- fun
- games
# ...
```

Now we just change the first document to load the list from the file:

```yaml
--- !YS-v0
map1 =::
  name: Bobbi Datamon
list1 =: load('big-list.yaml')
```

Not only can we access external data from a file, YS supports fetching
data from the web with the `curl` function and also getting data from databases!


## Inline Code in Data Mode

We can do the same things in a single data mode document.
The trick is that we need to have a way to evaluate code in a way that doesn't
affect the data.

The `::` syntax is our new friend here.

This lets us do code things like define variables and even define new functions
in a way that doesn't affect the data we are defining.

```yaml
--- !YS-v0:
::
  defn flip(array):
    reverse: array

  map1 =::
    name: Bobbi Datamon
  list1 =: load("big-list.yaml")

person:
  <<:: map1
  likes:: list1:flip
```

We defined a new function called `flip` which is a bit contrived since we could
have called `reverse` directly; but it proves the point.

We also defined our data variables.
We can actually define variables without `::`:

```yaml
--- !YS-v0:
map1 =::
  name: Bobbi Datamon
list1 =: load("big-list.yaml")

person:
  <<:: map1
  likes:: list1
```

In a big document, it's sometimes nice to define the data variables closer to
where they are used.


```yaml
--- !YS-v0:
map1 =::
  name: Bobbi Datamon

person:
  <<:: map1
  list1 =: load("big-list.yaml")
  likes:: list1
```

In fact, since we only use `map1` and `list1` once, we could have just inlined
them:

```yaml
--- !YS-v0:
person:
  <<:
    name: Bobbi Datamon
  likes:: load("big-list.yaml")
```


## How Do I `merge` Thee?

Let me count the ways :)

We are still using the `<<` merge key to merge mappings, but YS has a standard
`merge` function (among 100s of others).

```yaml
--- !YS-v0:
map1 =::
  name: Bobbi Datamon
list1 =: load("big-list.yaml")

person::
  merge::
  - ! map1
  - likes:: list1
```

Note the `!` in front of `map1`.
It toggles from data mode to code mode.
We need to use `!` for that purpose in data mode sequences.
For mappings we can use `key:: variable` but it is just a shorthand for
`key: ! variable`.

Another way to write that is:

```yaml
person::
  merge map1::
    likes:: list1
```

Since the `merge` key is already in code mode we can just put the `map1`
variable there.

Sometimes you want to use a function like `merge` without needing to further
indent the data you are applying the function to.

YS lets you put a function in a tag if you prefix it with a`:`:

```yaml
--- !YS-v0:
map1 =::
  name: Bobbi Datamon
list1 =: load("big-list.yaml")

person: !:merge
- ! map1
- likes:: list1
```


## Conditional Insertions in Mappings and Sequences

A big missing feature (and one definitely needed for Helm charts) was the
ability to conditionally insert key/value pairs into mappings depending on some
value being true or false.

Functionally that's a bit weird for a data language.
You can always apply any function to any data node to change its value, but how
do you make it control whether or not it exists at all?

You really need to apply a function to its parent mapping to make that happen…

…or do you?

YS ended up solving this using the `::` syntax, with a special rule.

```
!YS-v0:
foo: 111
::
  when a > b::
    bar: 222
baz: 333
```

The rule is that if the code under `::` evaluates to nil then ignore it.
If it evaluates to a mapping then merge it into the parent mapping.

!!! note

    The `when` function returns nil if the condition is false, and the body
    evaluation value if it is true.

To best understand this we can simply compile this YS to Clojure code.

```bash
$ ys -U --compile file.yaml  # or -c
(merge {"foo" 111} (merge (when (> a b) {"bar" 222}) {"baz" 333}))
```

!!! note

    You should know by now that every YS program is compiled to Clojure code
    and then evaluated.
    Well, data files that use YS are no different!

Given that `merge` ignores nil values, this is exactly what we want.

As we worked through the standard Helm templates we found that while this
worked just fine, it was a bit verbose.
We "fixed" that by letting you put the condition test "inside" the `::` key:

```
!YS-v0:
foo: 111
:when rand(100) > 50::
  bar: 222
baz: 333
```

I've changed `a > b` here to something you could actually run yourself.
Note that before we never defined `a` or `b`, so that would have failed.

We can even get this into a single line by using YAML's flow style:

```
!YS-v0:
foo: 111
:when rand(100) > 50:: {bar: 222}
baz: 333
```

Nice!

Now that you are up to speed, take a look at this page that shows how to
completely convert a stock Helm chart to use YS instead of Go templating:
<https://yamlscript.org/doc/helmys>

After the KubeCon we realized that this was also needed for sequences.
You should be able to conditionally insert items into a sequence at any point.

All you need to do is use all of the above on a `- ...` sequence entry
(returning a sequence or nil):

```
!YS-v0:
- aaa
- :when rand(100) > 50::
  - foo
  - bar
- zzz
```

Again let's compile this to Clojure code to see exactly what it does:

```bash
$ ys -c file.yaml
(concat ["aaa"] (concat (when (> (rand 100) 50) ["foo" "bar"]) ["zzz"]))
```

Similar to the mapping case, but we get `concat` instead of `merge` to do the
right thing with sequences.

Now we run it a couple times:

```bash
$ ys -Y file.yaml
- aaa
- zzz
$ ys -Y file.yaml
- aaa
- foo
- bar
- zzz
```

and Voilà!


## Conclusion

I hope this post gave you some good ideas about how cleanly you can extend your
YAML data files with YS.
And also how this is applicable today in major YAML consumers like Helm.

[Please let us know](https://github.com/yaml/yamlscript/issues) where YS can be
made even better.

**That's our goal!**
