---
title: YS Spring Update
date: 2024-04-16
authors: [ingydotnet]
categories: [General]
talk: 0
---

It's been a while since I let you know what's been happening with YS.
I've been busy working on it every day this year and I have a lot to tell you
about!

### YS Activity in 2024

Let me start by telling you about some of the events that have happened in the
YS world recently.

* [Seajure Talk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GajOBwBcFyA) -
  I gave a talk at the Seajure (Seattle Clojure) Meetup in March.
* [YS Article](
  https://thenewstack.io/with-yamlscript-yaml-becomes-a-proper-programming-language/) -
  The New Stack published an article about YS in March
* [YS Podcast](https://www.therepl.net/episodes/52/) -
  I was interviewed on the "The REPL" by Daniel Compton in April.

Finally I'm presenting a talk about [YS at the Open Source Summit North America](
https://sched.co/1aBPY) this Thursday, April 18th.
Super excited about that!

<!-- more -->


### YS Progress Since the Advent Series

I blogged about YS every day in December 2023.
That was something.
We were madly trying to implement all the stuff I was talking about.
I may have told a few small lies along the way, but I'm happy to say that
everything I talked about is now implemented and working.

And of course we've added a lot more since then.

Let's talk about some of the highlights.

### More YS (YAMLScript) Language Binding Libraries

We've added 4 new binding libraries for YS in 2024, bringing the total to 8:
[Clojure](https://clojars.org/org.yamlscript/clj-yamlscript) (new),
[Java](https://clojars.org/org.yamlscript/yamlscript) (new),
[NodeJS](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@yaml/yamlscript) (new),
[Perl](https://metacpan.org/dist/YAMLScript/view/lib/YAMLScript.pod),
[Python](https://pypi.org/project/yamlscript/),
[Raku](https://raku.land/zef:ingy/YAMLScript),
[Ruby](https://rubygems.org/search?query=yamlscript) (new) and
[Rust](https://crates.io/crates/yamlscript).

The idea is to eventually have binding libraries for every language where YAML
is currently used.
I expect more to come soon.
If you see a missing language that you want (and you are handy with FFI), please
consider writing a binding library for it and submitting a PR to the [YS Mono
Repository](https://github.com/yaml/yamlscript).

All the libraries are a small amount of code and are easy to write.

If you need help, please stop by the [YS Matrix Chat Room](
https://matrix.to/#/#chat-yamlscript:yaml.io) and we'll get you what you need.


### New Dot Chaining Operator

In Clojure you can write:

```clojure
(take 5
  (shuffle
    (filter even?
      (range 100))))
```

This evaluates to something like: `[94 36 4 70 74]`

Often people like to use Clojure's threading macro (`->`) to make this more
readable:

```clojure
(->> (range 100)
     (filter even?)
     (shuffle)
     (take 5))
```

Let's look at the same thing in YS in various styles.

Basic block style:

```yaml
take 5:
  shuffle:
    filter even?:
      range: 100
```

[Yes Expression style](/doc/yes.md):

```yaml
take(5
  shuffle(
    filter(even?
      range(100))))
```

Clojure threading style:

```yaml
->> range(100):
  filter(even?)
  shuffle
  take(5)
```

And now with the new dot chaining operator:

```yaml
range(100)
  .filter(even?)
  .shuffle()
  .take(5)
```

Or all on one line:

```yaml
$ ys -e 'say: range(100).filter(even?).shuffle().take(5)'
```


#### More about the Dot Chaining Operator


Above we used the dot operator to chain function calls together.
But it's even more useful than that.

Consider:

```yaml
a.b.3.c().d(e).f(g _).$h
```

If `a` is a mapping, the `"b"` (or `:b` or `'b`) key is looked up.  
`3` is the 4th element of the list that `b` resolves to.  
`c` is called as a function with the result of `3` as an argument.  
`d` is called as a function with the result of `c` and `e` as arguments.  
`f` is called as a function with `g` and the result of `d` as arguments.  
Finally the key in variable `h` is looked up in the result of `f`.

One common idiom is looking up environment variables.
For example: `ENV.HOME` or `ENV.USER.str/upper-case()`.


### New Operators and Syntax

In the last section we saw the new chaining operator: `.`.

The interesting thing to note here is that `.` already had a meaning in Clojure.
It's the namespace separator, as in `clojure.core/println`.

YS uses `::` for that separator instead, so we'd say `clojure::core/println`.

In a similar switch-up, we added the `%` and `%%` operators.
`(a % b)` compiles to the Clojure code `(rem a b)`, and `(a %% b)` compiles to
`(mod a b)`; 2 slightly different math functions.

In Clojure, `%` was already a shorthand for the `%1` argument in anonymous
functions.

In YS, you'll need to use `%1` for that:

```yaml
square =: \(%1 * %1)
```

Next we added `**` for exponentiation.
So `2 ** 3` compiles to `(pow 2 3)`.
We also added `pow` to the `ys::std` YS standard library, so you can say
`pow(2 3)` instead of `math/pow(2 3)`.
More about the standard library in a bit.

We added the Perl style regex operators `=~`, `!~` and regex literal `/.../`.

```yaml
if peanut-butter =~ /chocolate/:
  say: "You've got chocolate in my peanut butter!"
```

You might have noticed that YS uses `\( ... )` for anonymous functions,
where Clojure uses `#( ... )`.
Things starting with `#` are comments in YAML, so that's problematic.

We decided the `\` would be a general purpose escape character, but Clojure
already uses `\` for escaping character literals.

YS now uses `\\` for that purpose: `str(\\a \\b \\c)` would evaluate to
`"abc"`.

In Clojure you see `'foo` used extensively for quoting symbols.
In YAML, single quotes are used for string literals, and I felt it was important
to keep that distinction.

Luckily in Clojure you can use `(quote foo)` for the same thing.
In YS you can use `quote(foo)`.
We added the shorthand `q(foo)` as well as `\'foo` for quoting.

Finally, we added `foo*` splatting.

It is common in Clojure to use `apply` to call a function with a list of
arguments: `(apply f [1 2 3])` is the same as `(f 1 2 3)`.
So if `xs` is a sequence of numbers, you'd say `(apply f xs)`.

In YS you can say `f(xs*)` instead.

But it gets better.
You can you use `xs*` anywhere in a list of arguments: `f(1 xs* 3 ys* 5)`.


### Standard Global Variables

Clojure has dynamic variables like `*out*` and `*command-line-args*`.

YS now has a few of these, but we decided to use symbols with `ALL-CAPS`
instead of `*earmuffs*` for these. We also made them shorter in some cases.

* `ARGV` - Command line arguments
* `ARGS` - Like `ARGV` but numbers are converted to numeric values
* `ENV` - Environment variable mapping
* `CWD` - Current working directory
* `FILE` - Path to the current file being processed
* `INC` - The YS module include path
* `VERSIONS` - Mapping of versions of key components in YS

We'll be adding more of these as needed.


### The `ys::std` YS Standard Library

We added many libraries that are automatically available in every YS program:

* `ys::std` - The standard library (also available `std`)
* `clojure::str` - available as `str`
* `clojure::math` - available as `math`
* `clojure::tools::cli` - available as `cli`
* `babashka::fs` - avaiable as `fs`
* `babashka::http` - available as `http`

and more.

The `ys::std` library is the most important one.
We can see all the functions available in it by running:

```bash
$ ys -e 'say: q(std).ns-publics().keys().sort().vec()' | zprint '{:width 40}'
[$$ *_ +++ +++* +_ =-- _& _* _** _T __
 _dot abspath curl cwd die dirname each
 err exec join new num omap out pow pp
 pretty print process q rng say sh shell
 sleep throw toBool toFloat toInt toMap
 toStr use-pod warn www xxx yyy zzz]
```

You might note that the `print` function is part of `clojure::core` and
YS offers all of that by default.
In a few places we decided to replace Clojure functions with our own versions.
But we also added a `ys::clj` library that has all the original versions of the
replaced Clojure functions in it.

So if you really need `clojure::core/print`, you can say `clj/print`.

Here are the functions in `ys::clj`:

```bash
$ ys -e 'say: q(clj).ns-publics().keys().sort().vec()' | zprint '{:width 40}'
[compile load load-file num print use]
```

Not too many.

We'll look at `use` in the next section.


### Including YS Libraries and Modules

I'll start by saying we made the `require` function nice to use in YS.

The best way to describe it is to show you the actual test case for it:

```yaml
- name: Various require transformations in one pair
  yamlscript: |
    !YS-v0
    require:
      foo::aaa: => fa
      foo::bbb: one
      foo::ccc: one two
      foo::ddd:
        => fd
        one two
      foo::eee:
      foo::fff: :all
  clojure: |
    (require
      '[foo.aaa :as fa]
      '[foo.bbb :refer [one]]
      '[foo.ccc :refer [one two]]
      '[foo.ddd :as fd :refer [one two]]
      'foo.eee
      '[foo.fff :refer :all])
```

That's how we write tests for the YS compiler.

I think it explains how `require` works in YS pretty well.

The `require` function is used for including Clojure libraries.
We've also added support for writing libraries in YS itself.
We'll call them "modules" to distinguish them from Clojure libraries.

To use a module in YS, you use the `use` function.

```yaml
use: 'my-module'
```

This will look for a file called `my-module.ys` in the `INC` path.

The `INC` path is a list of directories that YS will look in for and it
defaults to the current directory.
You can override the `INC` path by setting the `YSPATH` environment variable.

YS also added support for [Babashka Pods](
https://book.babashka.org/#pods).
You can use a pod in YS like this:

```yaml
use-pod: "org.babashka/go-sqlite3" "0.1.0"
```


### Multi-doc and Anchor / Alias Support

This is the last topic for today, but it's a big one.

Anchors and aliases are an important feature of YAML.
They let you mark a node with a name and then refer to that node by name later.

Until now, YS has not supported anchors and aliases.
Supporting them is critical because YS should be able to load all existing YAML
config files, and config files often use anchors and aliases.

Well not only did we add support, we took them to the next level!

YAML has the concept of multiple documents in a single file.
Unfortunately, this is not very useful in the real world; at least not for
config files.
One problem is that YAML doesn't allow you to make an anchor in one document and
use an alias to it in another document.

YS makes great use of multi-doc combined with anchors and aliases.

Here's an example YS file `file.ys` that is part of my
[upcoming talk at Open Source Summit North America on Thursday](
https://sched.co/1aBPY):

```yaml
!YS-v0

--- !data

- &data !
  yaml/load: read('data.yaml')

- &map1
  key: value

- &seq1
  - one
  - two

- &dogs !
  yaml/load:
    curl:: https://yamlscript.org/dogs.yaml

--- !data

some: plain data string
number: 42

sentence::
  "$(*data.name) likes
  $(*data.langs.rand-nth())!!!"
2 dogs:: .*dogs.big.shuffle().take(2)

sequence: !concat*:
- *seq1
- [three, four]
mapping: !merge*:
- this: that
- *map1
```

The `data.yaml` file that gets loaded looks like this:

```yaml
name: Ingy
langs:
- Bash
- Clojure
- CoffeeScript
- Perl
- YS
```

When you run `ys -Y file.ys` you get:

```yaml
some: plain data string
number: 42
sentence: Ingy likes CoffeeScript!!!
2 dogs:
- Saint Bernard
- Great Dane
sequence:
- one
- two
- three
- four
mapping:
  this: that
  key: value
```

!!! note

    I really do like CoffeeScript! A lot!!

I'll let you figure out what's happening here.
It should be fairly obvious and I think it's all pretty cool.


### Moving Forward

That was a lot of information, I know.
I haven't really found the time to blog about these changes on a regular basis.

Hopefully I'll be able to do that more in the future.

Cheers!
