---
title: Sometimes it's hard to be lazy
date: 2025-07-30
draft: false
authors: [ingydotnet]
categories: [Summer-of-YS]
edit: blog/2025-07-30.md
comments: true
---

YS (being Clojure) is a functional language with immutable data structures
and lazy evaluation.

Laziness is cool because you can do complicated operations on large (even
infinite) sequences without having to load everything into memory.

But laziness can be very confusing when you're not used to it or you don't
expect it.

<!-- more -->


## Infinite Sequences

Here are some functions that return infinite sequences:

```yaml
seq1 =: range()    # 0, 1, 2, 3, ... to infinity
seq2 =: iterate((inc + inc) 0) # 0, 2, 4, 6, ... to infinity
seq3 =: repeat(0) # 0, 0, 0, 0, ... to infinity
seq4 =: cycle([1 2 3]) # 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, ... to infinity
```

These sequences are all lazy.

Don't try to print them.
They will never terminate.

But you can do things like square all the numbers in an infinite sequence:

```bash
$ ys -e 'map sqr: range()'
$
```

This worked fine and finished instantly because we never printed the result.
Therefore the infinite sequence was never realized.

The secret to making this useful is to `take` parts of the sequence.

Let's print the first 10 numbers of the sequence:

```bash
$ ys -e 'say: range().map(sqr).take(10)'
(0 1 4 9 16 25 36 49 64 81)
```

Or let's get the 2025th number in the sequence:

```bash
$ ys -e 'range().map(sqr).take(2025).last()'
4096576
```

or:

```bash
$ ys -e 'range().map(sqr).drop(2024).first()'
4096576
```


## The `for` loop gotcha

The `for` function returns a lazy sequence.

```bash
$ ys -e '
say:
  for i (1 .. 10):
    i:sqr
'
(1 4 9 16 25 36 49 64 81 100)
```

That works but say I want to print 1 per line.

```bash
$ ys -e '
for i (1 .. 10):
  say: i:sqr
'
```

Nothing happens.

That's because we used `for` to create a lazy sequence but never did anything
with it.

Therefore the sequence is never realized, and therefore nothing is printed.

Clojure has a `doall` functions that forces things within it to be realized.

```bash
$ ys -e '
doall:
  for i (1 .. 10):
    say: i:sqr
'
1
4
9
16
25
36
49
64
81
100
```

Nice!
That's what we wanted.

But do we have to add `doall` all the time?

YS has an `each` function that acts like a `for` inside a `doall` block.

```bash
$ ys -e '
each i (1 .. 10):
  say: i:sqr
'
1
4
9
16
25
36
49
64
81
100
```

Clojure (and thus YS) also has a `doseq` that acts like each.

Also the common Clojure `map` and `filter` functions return lazy sequences, and
sometimes cause you problems.

Try the `mapv` and `filterv` functions instead.
They return vectors instead of lazy sequences.
Vectors are not lazy, so they will be realized immediately.
