---
title: Where the Funcs Have No Name
date: 2025-06-10
draft: false
authors: [ingydotnet]
categories: [Summer-of-YS]
edit: blog/2025-06-10.md
comments: true
---

Any self-respecting functional language has a way to create anonymous functions.

In YS there are more than one!

Today we'll talk about nameless functions, why they are useful, and how to create and call them.

<!-- more -->


## What are anonymous functions good for?

A functional language has lots of functions, and a lot of those functions take
functions as arguments and/or return functions.

For example, the `map` function takes a function and a list, and applies the
function to each element of the list.

Here we square the numbers 1 through 10.

```bash
$ ys -pe 'map sqr: 1 .. 10'
(1 4 9 16 25 36 49 64 81 100)
```

The `sqr` function is part of the YS standard library.
So is `cube`.
But what about `quarq` (I just made that up) raising a number to the fourth power?

We could write a function for that:

```bash
$ ys -pe '
defn quarq(x): x ** 4
map quarq: 1 .. 10'
(1 16 81 256 625 1296 2401 4096 6561 10000)
```

But we could also write an anonymous function:

```bash
$ ys -pe 'map \(_ ** 4): 1 .. 10'
(1 16 81 256 625 1296 2401 4096 6561 10000)
```


## The anonymous function syntax

As you just saw, you create an anonymous function with the `\( ... )` syntax.

!!! note

    The `\` is supposed to remind you of the `λ` symbol in lambda calculus which
    is all about anonymous functions.
    Haskell also uses `\` for anonymous functions.

The `_` is a symbol for the first argument.
It can also be written as `%1`

Consider this example:

```bash
$ ys -pe 'apply \(%1 * %3 * %5): 1 .. 10'
15
```

We'll discuss `apply` in a future post, but notice how we multiplied the first,
third, and fifth elements of the list `1 .. 10` without caring about the second
or fourth elements?


## The `fn` function

The `fn` function defines a function.
It's what `defn` uses except that you don't need to give it a name.

These all do the same thing:

```yaml
defn quarq(x): x ** 4

quarq =: \(_ ** 4)

quarq =:
  fn(x): x ** 4

quarq =: fn([x] (x ** 4))
```


## Higher order YS


!!! note "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Higher-order_function"

    In mathematics and computer science, a higher-order function (HOF) is a function that does at least one of the following:

    - Takes one or more functions as arguments (i.e. a procedural parameter,
      which is a parameter of a procedure that is itself a procedure),
    - Returns a function as its result.

Let's write a function that returns a function.

Say we have a list of lengths in feet, meters, yards, or fathoms and we want to
convert them to one of the other units.

We could write a function for each conversion or we could write a function that
returns a function.

Convert a list of lengths from one unit to another

```yaml
# convert,ys
!YS-v0

defn main(from to *nums):
  each x nums:
    converter =: converter-maker(from to)
    say: "$x $from is $(converter x) $to"

foot =::
  meters: 3.28084
  fathoms: 6.0
  feet: 1.0
  yards: 3.0

defn converter-maker(a b):
  fn(x):
    x / foot.$b *: foot.$a
```

The `converter-maker` function takes the names of 2 units and returns a function
that converts a number from the first unit to the second unit.

Let's run it:

```bash
$ ys convert.ys fathoms meters 2 3 5 7 11 13
2 fathoms is 3.657599882956804 meters
3 fathoms is 5.486399824435206 meters
5 fathoms is 9.143999707392009 meters
7 fathoms is 12.801599590348811 meters
11 fathoms is 20.11679935626242 meters
13 fathoms is 23.774399239219225 meters
```

Fathom that!

Ok, it's Summer hammock time.

See you tomorrow!

----

!!! note

    If you made it this far, don't forget to add a reaction and please leave a
    comment if you have something to ask or say.
    I'd appreciate it!
