---
title: if - You Are Special
date: 2025-06-15
draft: false
authors: [ingydotnet]
categories: [Summer-of-YS]
edit: blog/2025-06-15.md
comments: true
---

Yesterday I told you that `if` is a function.

I lied.

In reality, `if` is a "special form".

I'll explain special forms in a minute, but let's just say that they're
"special"!

<!-- more -->


## Functions calls evaluate their arguments

Consider this code:

```bash
$ ys -e '
x =:
  DBG:
    add:
      sqr(4):DBG
      sqr(5):DBG
say: x
'
>>>16<<<
>>>25<<<
>>>41<<<
41
```

`DBG` is a function that prints its arguments and then returns the value of the
last one.

We can see clearly that `sqr(4)` and `sqr(5)` are evaluated first, and then
`add` is called with the results.

Let's try the same thing with `if`:

```bash
$ ys -e '
x =:
  DBG:
    if (rand(2):DBG > 1):DBG:
      sqr(4):DBG
      sqr(5):DBG
say: x
'
>>>1.288428806185308<<<
>>>true<<<
>>>16<<<
>>>16<<<
16
```

It looks like `sqr(5)` was never evaluated.

That's exactly how you want an `if` expression to work.

An `if` expression is a function that takes three arguments:

- A "condition clause"
- A "then clause"
- An "else clause"

Based on the truthiness of the condition clause, only one of the other two
clauses is evaluated.

This is true in practically any programming language.


## About Special Forms

Most Lisp languages have special forms.

Special forms "look" like functions in that they use parentheses containing the
form name and any arguments.
But they are built into the language to behave differently.

YS has about a dozen special forms, and we've already been using them in this
series.
For example `x =: y` compiles into a Lisp `def` or `let` form (depending on
the context) which are both special forms.



## Fuggedaboud`if`!

Now that you know about special forms, you can forget about them.

In YS, everything's a function.
A few of them are special.
They all try to do the right thing.

Enjoy the rest of your weekend!
