---
title: YS Testing Part 2
date: 2025-07-13
draft: false
authors: [ingydotnet]
categories: [Summer-of-YS]
edit: blog/2025-07-13.md
comments: true
---

[Yesterday](2025-07-12.md) we talked about writing tests in YS.

We also introduced the `ys::taptest` library, but we didn't really cover how it
works.

Let's take a closer look...

<!-- more -->

## The `ys::taptest` Library

The `ys::taptest` library is a tool for writing tests in YS.

It implements the [TAP](https://testanything.org/) protocol, which started as a
test framework for Perl, but has since been adopted by many other languages.
We use Perl's `prove` test runner/harness to run our tests.

One very cool thing about `prove` is that it honors the shebang line of the test
file that it is running.
This means that it can be used to run tests for any language as long as the test
files are outputting TAP.

Looking at our test file from yesterday:

```yaml
#!/usr/bin/env ys-0

use rot-13: :all
use ys::taptest: :all

test::
- code: rot-13('Hello, world!')
  want: Uryyb, jbeyq!
- code: rot-13('Uryyb, jbeyq!')
  want: Hello, world!
- code: rot-13('I like pie')
  want: V yvxr cvr

done: 3
```

We start with a YS shebang line, which tells `prove` to run our tests with YS.

Then we load the library we want to test (the `rot-13` library) and the
`ys::taptest` library.

In both cases we use the `:all` flag that tells `use` to export all the
library's public functions.
For `rot-13` we export the `rot-13` function and for `ys::taptest` we export the
`test` and `done` functions.

The `test` function takes a sequence of tests (which are just data) and
evaluates each test in turn, outputting the results as TAP to `stdout`.

The `done` function tells the harness that we're done running all the tests for
this test file.
This is important because if we have 20 tests and the first 10 pass and then
the program crashes, `prove` will know that we didn't run all the tests.
The `done` function takes an optional number that needs to be the number of
tests we expected to run.


## How a test works

Each test in the sequence is a map that must contain certain keys.

A test can have a `name` key that is used to identify the test.
It's a string and it will be printed for that test in the TAP output.
To see all the test names, you can run `prove` with the `-v` flag.
If you don't provide a `name` key, the test will be identified by the code that
is being tested.

Next a test must have either a `code` key or a `cmnd` key.
A `code` key is a string that is YS code that will be evaluated.
A `cmnd` key is a string that is a shell command that will be run.

Then a test can have a `want` key that is a string that is the expected result
of the test.
For `code` tests, the `want` value is the expected stringified result of the
evaluated code.
For `cmnd` tests, the `want` value is the expected stdout of the command.

Want can also be the expected error message of the test.
In that case, the test needs to define a pair of `what: error`.
By doing that, the test is declaring that it expects an error to be thrown.

The `want` value implies an exact match.
Instead of `want`, you can use `like: <regex>` to match the result, or you can
use `have: <substring>` to supply a substring that must be present in the
result.


## Other test keys

Sometimes you just want to concentrate on a single test.
For that you can specify a `ONLY: true` pair.

Similarly, if you want to skip a test for now, you can specify a `SKIP: true`
pair.

See the [ys::taptest documentation](/doc/ys-taptest) for more details.
