---
title: YS Streaming Mode
date: 2025-07-23
draft: false
authors: [ingydotnet]
categories: [Summer-of-YS]
edit: blog/2025-07-23.md
comments: true
---

We've seen before that YS can work with YAML files that contain multiple
documents.
"Document" is the YAML term for a single top level node (object).

YS returns the last document in the file by default.

YS can also load all the documents in the file.

This is called streaming mode, and we'll learn more about it today.

<!-- more -->


## Multiple Documents

Like I said, YS returns the last document in the file by default:

```bash
$ ys -Y <<<'
---
foo: 111
---
bar: 222
'
bar: 222
```

This makes sense, because the other documents could be data sets, code
definitions or YS modules that get used by the last document to produce its
desired value:

```bash
$ ys -Y <<<'
!ys-0
--- !code
foo =: 111
--- !data
bar:: foo
'
bar: 111
```

But what if we want to load multiple documents?

We can do that by using the `-s` flag:

```bash
$ ys -s -Y <<<'
---
foo: 111
---
bar: 222
'
---
foo: 111
---
bar: 222
```

What happens if some of the documents are code mode and others are data mode?

```bash
$ ys -s -Y <<<'
!ys-0
---
foo: bar
--- !code
foo =: 111
--- !data
foo:: foo
--- !code
say: "Hello, $foo!"
--- !code
(1 .. 3) + (10 .. 12)
--- !data
bar:: foo
'
Hello, 111!
---
foo: bar
---
foo: 111
---
- 1
- 2
- 3
- 10
- 11
- 12
---
bar: 111
```

If you count carefully, you'll see that there are 7 documents in the input, but
only 4 documents in the output.

YS will only return the documents whose value is representable as JSON and only
if the value is not `nil`.

In one of the documents, we just printed a line with `say`.
Let's see what the return value of `say` is:

```bash
$ ys -pe 'say: "Hello"'
Hello
nil
```

It looks like `say` returns `nil`.
That means the value of that document is `nil`.
Since the value of that document is `nil`, YS will not load it.

What about the variable assignment?

```bash
$ ys -pe 'foo =: 123'
#<Var@21b42ece: 123>
```

That returned a Clojure var object.
Since this is not something that can be represented as JSON, YS will not
load it.


## The `stream` function and the `_` variable

As YS evaluates a YAML file, it keeps track of the values of each document.
Any document can access the values of the previous documents.

The `stream` function returns a list of the values of the previous documents.

The `_` variable contains the value of the previous document.
It's short for `stream():last` or `stream.$`.

Consider this example:

```bash
$ ys -Ye '
!ys-0
---
foo: 111
bar: 222
--- !code
merge stream().$::
  baz: 333
--- !data
number:: _.foo * _.bar * _.baz
--- !code
say: stream():yaml/dump'
- foo: 111
  bar: 222
- foo: 111
  bar: 222
  baz: 333
- number: 8205786
```

In the final document, we print the values of the previous 3 documents in YAML.

The second to last document calculates the product of the values from the
previous document, whose value is the result of a merge using the document
before that.

If you study that example carefully, you'll see how to use the `stream` function
and the `_` variable.
