---
title: YS / Java Interoperability
date: 2025-07-02
draft: false
authors: [ingydotnet]
categories: [Summer-of-YS]
edit: blog/2025-07-02.md
comments: true
---

We know that YS is made from Clojure and the Clojure is made from Java.
Clojure code is interoperable with Java code.

So is YS interoperable with Java?

Yes, YS is can call Java methods on its objects.

Let's see how to do it.

<!-- more -->


## Calling Java Methods

Let's start with a simple example.

We can turn an integer into a string in several ways with YS.

```bash
$ ys -pe 'str: 42'
"42"
$ ys -pe 'str(42)'
"42"
$ ys -pe '42.str()'
"42"
$ ys -pe '42:str'
"42"
```

What is 42 really?

```bash
$ ys -pe '42:type'
java.lang.Long
```

Interesting.
It's actually a `java.lang.Long` instance object!

It would be cool if we could call the Java `Long` instance methods on it.
It turns out we can!

Let's look [here](
https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/lang/Long.html#method.summary)
to see what methods are available.

We can see that `toString` is available.

Let's try it!

```bash
$ ys -pe '42.~toString()'
"42"
```

Very nice.


## Java Interop Syntax for Instance Methods

In YS, Java instance methods require a `~` prefix.

After that, most of the YS expression forms should work the same as standard YS
function calls:

```bash
$ ys -pe '~toString: 42'
"42"
$ ys -pe '42.~toString()'
"42"
$ ys -pe '42:~toString'
"42"
```


## Java Interop Syntax for Static Methods

YS also supports calling static methods on Java classes.

If you looked carefully at the `java.lang.Long` documentation, you may have seen
the there is also a static method called `toString`.

We can call it like this:

```bash
$ ys -pe 'Long/toString: 42'
"42"
$ ys -pe 'Long/toString(42)'
"42"
$ ys -pe '42:Long/toString'
"42"
```

In YS, Java static methods are prefixed with their class name and a `/`.

Note: `Long` is the short name for `java.lang.Long`.


## Going Further

I've only shown you the basics of Java interop in YS.

Hopefully I've shown you enough for you to figure out how to call more
interesting Java methods on YS objects.

Java interop is a fairly new addition to YS.

Let me know how it works out for you in the comments below!
