---
title: YAMLScript is YS!
date: 2025-03-10
draft: false
authors: [ingydotnet]
categories: [General]
edit: blog/2025-03-10.md
talk: 0
---

Greetings! And welcome back to [YAMLScript](https://yamlscript.org) in 2025!

Or as we now say, _**YS in '25!**_.

It's been a minute since our last update, but we've been working super hard to
make YS the best it can be.

Oh… What's **"YS"**, you say?

Well, don't say "Y-S"…


## Say "Wise"!

----

<!-- more -->

Think of YS as the plural of "Y".

The more Ys, the better!

??? question "Why didn't the owl ask Y? :material-owl:"

    :material-owl: :material-owl: She was 2 YS!


**YS is the new nickname for YAMLScript.** It's shorter, easier to write, and
kinda fun to say.
It's even more fun to add it to the start or end of a word. like "PennyYS"
("Pennywise") or "YSAcre".

We have quite a few little projects already that use YS and have it in their
names.
Like these:

* [HelmYS](../../helmys.md) (_Helmwise_) -
  A project to use YS for Kubernetes Helm charts templates.
* SchemaYS - A new schema language project for YAML created with YS.
* [MarkdownYS](https://github.com/yaml/yamlscript/blob/main/util/mdys) -
  A Markdown preprocessor that uses inline YS and YAML to generate repetitive
  content from data.
  Click View (eye icon) at the top of the [YS Standard Library doc](
  ../../doc/ys-std.md) to see it in action.

We even have a short new domain name "getys.org" for YS downloads/installs:
```
curl -s https://getys.org/ys | bash  # Install the latest YS
```


## Love at Second Site

Check out our new [yamlscript.org website](https://yamlscript.org)!

[Material for MkDocs](https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/) is so great.
We love it!

I honestly don't think there will ever be a better framework for making static
websites.
It's so feature rich and all the features actually work together.
Almost every feature is configured with a line or two of YAML.
What could be better than that?

We even added a few new YS features in places where we needed them, and there
was very little work to do it.

I'll write a full blog post about the new website soon, (the blog plugin makes
it so easy to write and publish posts), but for now, here's a few highlights:

* Almost every page has a "View Source", "Edit this Page", or "Discuss this
  Page" button at the top.
  Including this one!
  Try them out.
* All pages are written in Markdown or MarkdownYS, so it should be trivial for
  you to contribute if you want to add, fix or discuss something.
* Everything on the site is part of the [YS Open Source Mono-Repo](
  https://github.com/yaml/yamlscript/tree/website/www/) in the `www` directory
  on the `website` branch.


## So Many YS Bits to Share…

I'm really looking forward to sharing all the new YS features with you.
Now that we have the perfect platform for writing and publishing, I expect to
be writing a whole lot more very soon.

Until then, take care and be YS!
