---
title: YS Global Variables
date: 2025-06-13
draft: false
authors: [ingydotnet]
categories: [Summer-of-YS]
edit: blog/2025-06-13.md
comments: true
---

Last night a gave a talk about YS and YAML to the [Toronto DevOps Meetup](
https://www.meetup.com/toronto-enterprise-devops-user-group/events/307801910/).

I had a lot of fun, and met a lot of great people.

Today I'm going to share one of the things I covered last night.
Global variables.

It's not the most exciting topic, but it can be useful.

<!-- more -->


## YS has some predefined global variables

Yesterday I we talk about the `ENV` variable which is one of the predefined
global variables.
It's probably the most useful one.

But there are other ones that you can use too.


### Stdio Handles

* `IN` - Standard Input file handle

* `OUT` - Standard Output file handle

* `ERR` - Standard Error file handle


### Command Line Arguments

* `ARGV` - A program's command line arguments. A vector of strings.

* `ARGS` - Same as `ARGV` but as but args the look like numbers are converted
  to numbers.


### File System

* `FILE` - The absolute path to the program's file.

* `DIR` - The absolute path to the program's directory.

* `CWD` - The current working directory.


### Runtime Values

* `RUN`- A map of a few runtime values:
    * `RUN.bin` - The absolute path to the directory of the `ys` binary.
    * `RUN.pid` - The process ID of the current process.
    * `RUN.versions` - The versions of key components in the `ys` binary.

* `VERSION` - The version of the `ys` binary.


That's all for today.
Headed out for a weekend of Summertime camping.

See you tomorrow if there's wifi in the woods!
