---
title: Making YS be Valid YAML
date: 2025-07-16
draft: false
authors: [ingydotnet]
categories: [Summer-of-YS]
edit: blog/2025-07-16.md
comments: true
---

I'll say it again.
All YS syntax is 100% YAML.  The YS compiler uses a third party YAML parser so
there is no way that YS code cannot be YAML.

YS code also uses a lot of Clojure syntax.
This makes sense since the code gets compiled to Clojure in the end.

Some Clojure code looks a lot like YAML but with subtle differences.

Today we'll talk about the little gotchas that can trip you up when you're
writing YS code, and how to work around them.

<!-- more -->


## YS `+` escaping

The `*` operator is polymorphic.
If you "multiply" a string by a number, it will repeat the string that many
times.

```bash
$ ys -e 'say: "X" * 3'
Compile error: while scanning an alias
 in reader, line 2, column 10:
    say: "X" * 3
             ^
```

That didn't go as expected.
What happened?

Well, that is simply not valid YAML.
You can't have extra text after the end of a quoted string (except for
comments).

We want the value of the key `say` to be a YS expression, which means that it
needs to be a YAML plain (unquoted) scalar.

Plain scalars can't start with a YAML syntax character like `#%[{'"!&*|>`.

One way to get around this particular case is to use parens.
Plain scalars can start with a paren.

```bash
$ ys -e 'say: ("X" * 3)'
XXX
```

A more general way is to use the `+` YS escape character.

```bash
$ ys -e 'say: +"X" * 3'
XXX
```

The `+` makes the value be a valid YAML plain scalar.
YS will then ignore a `+` that precedes a YAML syntax character.

You can have whitespace after the `+`, so this is valid:

```bash
$ ys -e '
say: +
  "X" * 3'
XXX
```

## Map and Vector Literals

How about this?

```bash
$ ys -mc -Ye '=>: {a: 1, b: 2}'
Compile error: Flow mappings not allowed in code mode
```

The `-mc` flag tells YS to start in code mode.
This is the default for `-e` but we use it here to make it clear.

YS does not allow YAML flow mappings or flow sequences in code mode.

We can use the `+` escape character to get around this:

```bash
$ ys -mc -Ye '=>: +{a: 1, b: 2}'
Compile error: mapping values are not allowed here
 in reader, line 2, column 8:
    =>: +{a: 1, b: 2}
```

Oops!
What happened now?

Well, the `+` makes this a YAML plain scalar, but YAML plain scalars can't have
`: ` in them.

Also this is not the correct way to express a map literal in YS or Clojure.
It's close, but:

* No `:` is used
* Strings need to be quoted
* Commas are optional whitespace

Let's try again:

```bash
$ ys -mc -Ye '=>: +{"a" 1, "b" 2}'
a: 1
b: 2
```

There we go.

We could also have switched to data mode for the value, which has to allow YAML
flow mappings and sequences.

```bash
$ ys -mc -Ye '=>:: {a: 1, b: 2}'
a: 1
b: 2
```

Sometimes normal YAML syntax (via data mode) is the best way to go.

We could even use a YAML block mapping here instead:

```bash
$ ys -mc -Ye '=>::
  a: 1
  b: 2'
a: 1
b: 2
```

There are more gotchas to talk about, but I'll save them for another time.

If you come across gotchas of your own, please share them in the comments!
