---
title: The loop and more loops
date: 2025-07-31
draft: false
authors: [ingydotnet]
categories: [Summer-of-YS]
edit: blog/2025-07-31.md
comments: true
---


The looping function that offers the most control in YS is called `loop`.
It's also the most verbose.

There are lots of alternatives that are more specific and require less code, but
they don't let you do everything, like decide when to stop.

We'll talk about both today.

<!-- more -->


## The `loop` function

I implied above that you could control when to stop the `loop` function.

It's kinda the other way around.

You control when to keep looping!

Loop has a matching `recur` "function" that you can call to keep looping.
Otherwise it exits and returns the value that was evaluated.

And remember, `loop` is a function, so it always returns something.

The `loop` function takes a set of paired arguments where the first value is a
variable name and the second value is its starting value.

The `recur` call, calls the `loop` function (tail) recursively with a new value
for each variable.

Here's a simple example that finds the highest power of 2 less than a million:

```bash
$ ys -pe '
loop i 1:
  if i < 1000000:
    recur: i * 2
    else: i'
1048576
```

See how we used the `if` function to decide when to continue rather than when to
stop?
It's really the same question but it feels backwards.


## More loops

We've seen these before but the main ones are: `map`, `for` and `reduce`.

`map` is a list comprehension.
That's useful for transforming the elements of a list.
Let's double the numbers 0 through 9:

```bash
ys -pe '(1 .. 9).map(double)'
(1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0 7.0 8.0 9.0)
```

By "double" we don't mean "multiply by 2".
We mean convert integers to floats (longs to doubles).

`for` is a loop that iterates over a list assigning each element to a variable.
It processes the entire list before returning.

Let's use it to double (in the by 2 sense) the numbers 0 through 9:

```bash
$ ys -pe 'for i (1 .. 9): 2 * i'
(2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18)
```

OK, so I lied.
The `for` function actually does give you some control.
You can use `:when` to let it know which elements to process.

Let's double the numbers 0 through 9 that are even:

```bash
$ ys -pe 'for i (1 .. 100) :when (i < 10): 2 * i'
(2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18)
```


`reduce` takes each element of a list and uses them to calculate a single value.

It takes a function, a starting value (or accumulator), and a list to process.

Let's total the squares of 1 through 9 and add them to 100:

```bash
$ ys -e '
say:
  reduce _ 100 (1 .. 9):
    fn(total, n):
      total + n:sqr
'
385
```

Remember from before, the first argument to `reduce` is a function but in YS
it's often nicer to put the big thing (the function) last, so we use the `_`
placeholder.

There are lots more specialized looping functions in YS like `filter` and
`remove` (for finding or removing elements from a list), but those are the most
common ones.
