---
title: Fun with Function Tags
date: 2025-07-09
draft: false
authors: [ingydotnet]
categories: [Summer-of-YS]
edit: blog/2025-07-09.md
comments: true
---

We've seen different ways to call YS functions in YAML.

Say we have this `file.yaml`:

```yaml
people:
- Alice
- Bob
- Charlie
```

What if we wanted to reverse the list?

<!-- more -->


## Tag Function Calls

We could use the `reverse` function:

```yaml
!YS-v0:
people::
  reverse::
  - Alice
  - Bob
  - Charlie
```

We get:

```bash
$ ys -Y file.yaml
people:
- Charlie
- Bob
- Alice
```

That works but it's too much work for a simple function call.
We had to indent the people list, add the `reverse` function, and the switch to
code mode with `::` and back to data mode with another `::`.

This is where function tag calls really shine.

```yaml
!YS-v0:
people: !reverse
- Alice
- Bob
- Charlie
```

We get the same result:

```bash
$ ys -Y file.yaml
people:
- Charlie
- Bob
- Alice
```

But all we did is add a tag.
No indenting and no mode switching.

On the other hand, tag function calls are less flexible.
They only take a single argument; the node that has been tagged.

Fortunately there are all sorts of ways to do whatever it is you want to do with
these tag calls.

Let's explore some of them.


## Chained Tags

What if we wanted to sort the list in reverse?

In code mode we can chain tags like this:

```yaml
!YS-v0
fruit-list =::
- Date
- Banana
- Apple
- Cherry

=>::
  fruit:: fruit-list:sort:reverse
```

Gives us:

```bash
$ ys -Y file.yaml
fruit-list:
- Date
- Cherry
- Banana
- Apple
```

It turns out we can also do this with tags, in data mode:

```yaml
!YS-v0:

fruit: !sort:reverse
- Date
- Banana
- Apple
- Cherry
```

We get the same result.

Could combine `sort()` and `take(3)` to get the first 3 items in sorted order?

```yaml
!YS-v0:

fruit: !sort.take(3)
- Date
- Banana
- Apple
- Cherry
```

Let's see what we get:

```bash
$ ys -Y file.yaml
Compile error: Invalid tag for data mode node: !sort.take(3)
```

Nope.

We need a different approach.


## Combining Functions

Remember that in YS we can always define our own functions.

If we did that here, then no problem:

```bash
$ ys -md -Y -e '
::
  defn sort-take-3(list):
    take 3:
      sort: list

fruit: !sort-take-3
- Date
- Banana
- Apple
- Cherry
'
fruit:
- Apple
- Banana
- Cherry
```

A couple things here:

Remember the `-e` expressions are assumed to be in code mode.
Here we wanted to start in data mode, so we used `-md` (short for
`--mode=data`).

In data mode we can use a `::` block to inject some code.

This worked but it's too much work for such a simple task.

Luckily there's more than one way to define a YS function.

```bash
$ ys -md -Y -e '
sort-take-3 =: \(_:sort.take(3))
fruit: !sort-take-3
- Date
- Banana
- Apple
- Cherry
'
fruit:
- Apple
- Banana
- Cherry
```

This is way better.

We assigned an anonymous function using our preferred chaining syntax to the
`sort-take-3` variable.

When you need a complex function to use as a tag, you can just define it first.

I should point out that you don't need to define the functions at the beginning
of your file.
You can defined them anywhere, as long as they are defined before you use them.

There's more to show you about YS function composition.

Stay tuned to the Summer of YS!
