---
title: The Special Little Symbol
date: 2025-07-05
draft: false
authors: [ingydotnet]
categories: [Summer-of-YS]
edit: blog/2025-07-05.md
comments: true
---

Yesterday I showed you a FizzBuzz solution in YS.
Here it is again:

```yaml
!YS-v0

defn main(n=100):
  each x (1 .. n): !:say
    or? _ x:
      str ((x % 3).! &&& 'Fizz'):
          ((x % 5).! &&& 'Buzz')
```

See that `_` sitting there in the middle all by itself?

What's that all about?

Well `_` is a special symbol in YS, and it means different things in different
contexts.

<!-- more -->


## The `_` Placeholder

In that code we want the result of the `str(...)` call, which will either be
`Fizz`, `Buzz`, `FizzBuzz` or an empty string.
If it was an empty string then we want to use the value of `x`.

Basically we wanted `or?(str(...) x)` or put another way `str(...) ||| x`.

In this case the `str(...)` call was to big to fit on one line.
So we used `_` to mean: put the big expression after the `:` where the `_` is.

This ends up being a really helpful when the first argument is a function and
you want to use a non-trivial anonymous function for it.
A common case for this is the `reduce` function.

Here's a `reduce` to find prime numbers:

```yaml
!YS-v0

say:
  reduce _ [2] (3 .. 100):
    fn(primes number):
      if primes.map(mod + number).some(zero?):
        primes
        conj(primes number)
```

Let's run it:

```bash
$ ys primes.ys
[2 3 5 7 11 13 17 19 23 29 31 37 41 43 47 53 59 61 67 71 73 79 83 89 97]
```

The `reduce` function takes 3 arguments:

* A function to call for each element in the list
* An initial value
* A list to reduce

It would be nicer the the function came last because the 2nd and 3rd arguments
are usually short.

If we had already defined the `prime-finder` function we could have written:  
`reduce prime-finder [2] (3 .. 100)`.

But often the function is not reusable so we just want to write it inline.

The `_` placeholder lets us get the best of both worlds.


## The `_` Dummy Variable

In multi-variable assignments we can do this:

```yaml
_ a b _ c =: a-list
```

Which could be written as:

```yaml
a b c =: + [a-list.1, a-list.2, a-list.4]
```

Use `_` as a dummy variable to ignore some of the values.

You could also use it in function arguments:

```bash
$ ys -e '
defn shift([_ *rest]): rest
say: (0 .. 4):shift'
(1 2 3 4)
```

Here we define a `shift` function that uses `_` to ignore the first argument
and return the rest.


## The `_` Position Indicator

Most common functions used in chains, are "smart" about their arguments.

For example, these are all equivalent:

```yaml
list.take(5)
5.take(list)
take(5 list)
```

The `take` function takes a number and a list.
The `.` chain operator puts the LHS into the first position.

That means that `list.take(5)` should have been evaluated as `take(list 5)`
which is wrong and would throw an error.

But YS handles `take` and other common functions specially and checks the
argument types at runtime and does the right thing for you.

Unforunately, this is not true for all functions, and also the runtime check
takes some time.

You can also write that as: `list.take(5 _)`.
The `_` indicates the position to put the LHS into.
It also disables the "smart" runtime check since you told it explicitly where
things should go.
This makes it a little faster to run, which might be important sometimes.

If you wrote your own `foo-bar` function that also took a number and a list,
you'd need to use `_` for `list.foo-bar(5 _)` because `foo-bar` wouldn't have
the special "smart" property.


## Using `_` in Anonymous Functions

We've already seen this but `_` is the shorthand for the first argument in an
anonymous function.

```bash
$ ys -e '
squared =: \(_ * _)
say: 8:squared
'
64
```


## The Previous Document Value

In a multi-document YAML file, the `_` symbol is the previous document value.

```bash
$ ys -e '!YS-v0
--- !data
foo: blue
bar: 10
--- !code
say: _.foo * _.bar
'
blueblueblueblueblueblueblueblueblueblue
```

You can use this for one liners that take a file and also a `-e` expression
argument:

```bash
$ curl -sL https://gist.github.com/gsscoder/e0e905fbef23376aabfa695d85d8ef5c/raw |
ys -e 'say: rand-nth(_)' -
Finnegan
```

<https://gist.github.com/gsscoder/e0e905fbef23376aabfa695d85d8ef5c> is a JSON
(aka YAML) file with a sequence of first names; posted as a GitHub Gist.

Since YS always evaluates the `-e` expression after the file (`-` for stdin
here) is evaluated, `_` is the value of the evaluated file.


----

I hope I remembered all of the places you can use `_` in YS.

It's quite possible that YS will have more places to use `_` in the future.

If you have ideas for more places to use `_` in YS, please let me know in the
comments.
