---
title: About the v0
date: 2025-07-08
draft: false
authors: [ingydotnet]
categories: [Summer-of-YS]
edit: blog/2025-07-08.md
comments: true
---

The current version of YS as of today is `0.2.1`.

I'm sure you've noticed the `v0` part of the `!YS-v0` tag by now.

YS intends to be a "versioned programming language", where `v2` can behave
very differently from `v1` while still being able to use `v1` libraries and
such.

Today I'll tell you a bit more about the versioning and how things are expected
to work.

Remember, we are still officially at `v0` so even the rules of how versioning
works are not yet set in stone!


## v0 is now Stable (essentially)

I'd like to start off by saying that `v0` is essentially stable at this point.

This means that YAML files starting with `!YS-v0` should continue to work
without any changes.

Put another way... "Don't worry, be YS!"

Work is currently under way to put out a stable `v1` release in the next couple
of months and then start work on `v2`.


## What is `v1`?

It might seem strange to only spend a couple of months on `v1`.
It won't be much different from `v0` when it is released.

Actually that's the point.

Declaring the stable version to be `v0` doesn't make much sense.
At least it doesn't seem like it would spark much confidence.

Having a stable `v1` out there is what many people are waiting for.
In reality it shouldn't be much different than how things stand today.
But it will be a promise.

The promise is that, once released, all code written for `v1` will continue to
work in the future.

While `v1` is under development, it will be available to use as `!YS-v1-a`.

In essence, the `v1` (short) dev period will be useful for ironing out the
details of creating a new YS version.


## More About the Version Numbering

The `v0`, `v1`, `v2` etc indicates the major version number (in the semver
sense) of the YS language version.

The plan is to use semver for the versioning.

`v1` shows up in several places:

* The `!YS-v1` tag
* The `#!/usr/bin/env ys-0` shebang line
* The `ys-0` and `ys-0.2.1` binary names

Somehow any piece of YS code needs to know what version of YS it was written
for.

When `v3` comes out, it should be able to use libraries written for `v1`, `v2`,
or `v3`.

It's an ambitious goal, but it should allow for a lot of flexibility and an ever
improving language.


## Clojure Stability

To pull this off, it is very fortunate that Clojure is extremely stable and
backwards compatible.

In my personal experience, I've never seen Clojure code break when upgrading
to a new major version of the language and/or tooling.


## What is the actual Plan?

I wrote up a couple of internal documents for the YS team about v1 and
versioning.

I'll share them with you now that the team has had a chance to review them:

* [YS Versioning](/doc/ys-versioning)
* [v1 Planning](/doc/v1-planning)

These documents are still subject to change, but they are what we are working
with now.

If you have any questions, or suggestions, please let us know.

You can start in the comments below.
